FIP-0090: Non Interactive PoRep (#891)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-xxxx-ni-porep.md

On one hand, `SealRandomness` needs to be taken from finalized blocks, but on the other hand it can not be taken farther back than necessary (in order to protect against long-range attacks). This means that `SealRandomness` needs to be verified.

Given NI-PoRep removes onchain interaction, `SealRandomness` verification becomes more difficult, but still necessary to protect the chain against the same class of attacks mentioned above.

We set up a validity time window which holds for all the sectors committed onchain together. We set this time window to be  `sealChallengeEarliest` = 30 days, which is coherent with the current `MaxProveCommitDuration` as per FIP-0013.

This means that, if PC1, PC2, C1, C2 happen locally over time resulting into different sectors sealed in different moments in time and committed on-chain at the end of the process, all sectors committed together should have a randomness which is not older than  `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs in the past. As a result, a NI-PoRep step needs to be completed within `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs overall to be valid.

## Addressing concerns **due to interaction removal**

> One point to take into account when dealing with NI-PoRep, compared with the status quo, is that a malicious party wanting to take over the network could potentially keep accumulating sectors locally before onboarding them to the network all at once.
> 
> [Our analysis](https://pl-strflt.notion.site/Non-Interactive-PoRep-34705d7868934815bd777901b208b09a) shows that in terms of security there is no substantial difference with the case of Interactive PoRep and no additional security risks are introduced.
> A potential future improvement would be to decouple to decouple power table lookback from consensus and set it to 7 days. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Concerns were raised over the possibility that a malicious party wanting to take over the network could potentially keep accumulating sectors locally before onboarding them to the network all at once. [Our analysis](https://pl-strflt.notion.site/Non-Interactive-PoRep-34705d7868934815bd777901b208b09a) shows that no additional security risks are introduced with respect to Interactive PoRep. Decoupling the power table lookback from consensus will improve security for both pathways, and may be the subject of a future FIP.
```

Reviewer: @irenegia @lucaniz: this suggestion should address https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/891/files#r1471095529 and https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/891/files#r1471866380. I tried to keep the future work but making it clear that it's not specific to NI-PoRep of this FIP. Feel free to commit & resolve if you agree, or let's iterate on the right phrasing.

My comment stands on the Notion link. The analysis is important enough that it should be snapshot and brought into the repo, likely under `/resources/fip-xxxx/security-analysis.md`. Should be trivial to copy over the md from Notion.

Reviewer 2: I'll add the analysis  in the resources page, agreed!

Reviewer: I'll commit the change and resolve the pending discussions based on @irenegia's 👍 but this is your document, so do feel free to change it further.

## Incentive Considerations

NI-PoRep will implement the batch balancer currently in place. See [FIP-0013](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md) for details.

## Product Considerations

NI-PoRep represents another step forward after the introduction of Synthetic PoRep (see [FIP-0059](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0059.md)). 

As already mentioned above, NI-PoRep is a prerequisite to unblock new use cases like trustless SaaS and HDD wholesale as well as allowing for SupraSeal software employment at full potential. 

## Benchmarks

> In order to have a good cost estimation, we ran benchmarks on different systems. It’s consistent that the difference in the total runtime of the SNARK phase between interactive PoRep and non-interactive PoRep is the expected 12.5-13x.
> 
> This phase consists of two distinct steps. The synthesis, which is a memory and CPU heavy operation and the proving, which is GPU heavy. The SupraSeal implementation only target the proving. There we see speedups between 6-10x. It depends on the GPU, while newer generations see higher speedups.
> 
> When the synthesis is also taken into account, then the overall improvements are 3-5x. There older GPU generations see higher speeds as the proving time dominates over the synthesis time.
> 
> For exemplary results of the benchmarks see: [SupraSeal C2 benchmarks](https://www.notion.so/SupraSeal-C2-benchmarks-9739face18a9448e8b6de1a1fcc9c0e3?pvs=21).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Comparison against Interactive PoRep

In order to have a good cost estimation, we ran benchmarks on different systems. We observe that the SNARK phase of NI-PoRep is consistently 12.5x-13x slower than Interactive PoRep, in line with expectations.

### Speedup due to SupraSeal

The SNARK phase consists of two distinct steps:
- The synthesis, which is a memory- and CPU-heavy operation
- The proving, which is GPU-heavy

The SupraSeal implementation only targets the proving, where we observe speedups between 6-10x. When the synthesis is also taken into account, then the overall improvements are 3-5x. This means that NI-PoRep with SupraSeal is only 2.5-4.5x slower than Interactive PoRep without SupraSeal.

The ratio between synthesis and proving time depends on the GPU, and consequently so does the speedup. In particular, synthesis time tends to be dominant in newer GPUs, reducing the overall speedup.

For benchmark data, see: [SupraSeal C2 benchmarks](https://www.notion.so/SupraSeal-C2-benchmarks-9739face18a9448e8b6de1a1fcc9c0e3?pvs=21).
```

Reviewer: I'll commit the change and resolve the pending discussions based on @vmx's 👍 but this is your document, so do feel free to change it further.

---
fip: XXXX
title: NI-Porep

> author: @lucaniz @Kubuxu @nicola @cryptonemo @vmx @irenegia

Reviewer 2: i don't understand... should I put usernames without the `@` ?
In the link you sent I see the `@` used...

> author: @lucaniz @Kubuxu @nicola @cryptonemo @vmx @irenegia

Reviewer: The first character after the `:` cannot be a `@`, but you can then use `@` freely. The recommended format is `name (@handle)`, though names aren't strictly required. If you don't use them, though, I guess handles without `@` would be the easiest.

- [Gas cost reduction] Current PoRep is composed by two steps: PreCommit and ProveCommit. With NI-PoRep there is no more `PreCommit` method and message, only `ProveCommit` will stay (only one step with one chain message needed to onboard sectors to the network).  This translates in a possible gas cost reduction when considering  aggregated sectors (i.e., according to [our estimation](https://cryptonet.org/notebook/interactivenon-interactive-porep-gas-cost-comparison), when aggregating 6 sectors current PoRep is 2.1x more expensive than NI-PoRep per sector).
- [Lower HW requiremnts] With NI-PoRep there is no more waiting time between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This helps when using sealing software (like SupraSeal) that seals more sectors at the same time. Currently, the memory requirements are given by the fact that some data need to be stored during the waiting time. Having no waiting time implies lower memory requirements. 

**Trustless Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS) Enabled**

NI-PoRep enables the full separation between computation and storage task (in particular, no `PCD` (PreCommit Deposit) is needed), which brings the following benefits:

> - SaaS would be possible in a trustless manner (low risk-low trust: sealer does not need to put down collateral that will need to be re-paid by buyers or buyer does not need to pre-pay this amount)

Reviewer 2: With NI-PoRep it is trustless from the point of view of the SaaS provider (currently the provider needs to put down the PCD for the SP or ask the SP to give the PCD in advance).
Of course there is still some trust needed from the point of view of the SP who is buying the pre-sealed sector that this operation is done correctly. Like the usual trust in a buyer-seller relationship. 

Is it more clear now @jsoares ?

> - SaaS would be possible in a trustless manner (low risk-low trust: sealer does not need to put down collateral that will need to be re-paid by buyers or buyer does not need to pre-pay this amount)

Reviewer: It's clear, thanks :)

- SaaS providers can delegate proving tasks. In particular, proving can be split into specialized subtasks which get outsourced to specialized entities (labeling the graph, Snarks, …)
- Enabling HDD wholesale: it would be possible to receive brand new drives with Sector-Keys pre-generated in your name

**PoRep Secured Cryptographically and not Rationally**

> Chain cryptographic security gets increased: NI-PoRep would make misbehaving cryptographically infeasible rather than irrational.

Author: Sector proven with NI-Porep are indeed more secure (for the reason highlighted). We can change "chain" with NI-PoRep sectors, if this sounds better

> Chain cryptographic security gets increased: NI-PoRep would make misbehaving cryptographically infeasible rather than irrational.

Reviewer: I think it's a matter of correctness/rigour here, not sounding better. Just incorporating your suggested phrasing:

```suggestion
The cryptographic security of sectors proven with NI-PoRep gets increased: NI-PoRep makes misbehaving cryptographically infeasible rather than irrational.
```

In NI-PoRep, since randomness is derived locally, there is no link anymore between PoRep and consensus attacks. This means that

- Consensus attacks are not a concern anymore for PoRep security
- PoRep can now work “agnostically” with any consensus protocol

**Backward compatibility**

- NI-PoRep would be a separate proof type with a different on-chain flow as current PoRep. Anyone can decide whether use NI-PoRep or not.
- No need for a new trusted setup

## Specification

NI-PoRep protocol can be summarized as follows:

**Graph labelling and commitments** (similar to the current `PC1` and `PC2` computation)

1. Using `ReplicaID` (which contains `CommD`), SP computes the labels for all layers and the replica R;
2. SP computes the column commitments `CommC` , `CommRLast` and finally computes `CommR = Poseidon_2(CommC, CommRLast)`;

**Storage Provider locally generates `NI_ChallengesNumber` challenges and vanilla proofs;**

> 1. Each challenge is of the form `ch_i = H(tag, ReplicaID, commR, i)`;

Author: I disagree. 
NI_Challenge_i seems to be a single challenge for the NI proving step, while instead SP is generating the whole Non interactive challenge set, thus a total of `NI_ChallengesNumber` challenges

> 1. Each challenge is of the form `ch_i = H(tag, ReplicaID, commR, i)`;

Reviewer: Not sure I get your response, which is probably another argument in favour of having clearer variable names. My only point was that ch_i could be expanded to challenge_i, and that you're prefixing everything NI-specific with "NI", so might as well prefix this one too (i.e. let's just have consistent naming conventions). Reading your message, I feel like I may have misunderstood what this is?

> 1. Each challenge is of the form `ch_i = H(tag, ReplicaID, commR, i)`;

Reviewer 2: ch_i is what we used before in proof code spec, buy okay to change it in the self-explained NI_Challenge_i

2. SP computes responses for all the `NI_ChallengesNumber` challenges, which result in `NI_ChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs;

**Storage Provider publishes the new `NI_ProveCommitSector` proof**

> 1. SP takes the `NI_ChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs and computes the corresponding SNARK proofs for these challenges.

Author: Yes, NI_ChallengesNumber is an integer count.
NI_ChallengesNumber implicitly select `NI_ChallengesNumber` (basically node selected by the integer between 0 and (2ˆ30)-1 and correspondent path, which is what vanilla proofs are )

I'd honestly keep the "`NI_ChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs" statement, as someone could then ask "how many vanilla proofs?". My personal take of course.

> 1. SP takes the `NI_ChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs and computes the corresponding SNARK proofs for these challenges.

Reviewer: I think it's fine to keep it if that's your preference, will resolve the discussion.

NI-PoRep has little downside with respect to the status quo: it removes PreCommit at the cost of augmenting C2 (ie SNARK generation) costs (which would result in a limited cost increase looking at onboarding costs as a whole). Indeed, NI-PoRep requires 12.8x more PoRep Challenges, this translates into an 12,8x Snark proving overhead. We analyzed how this snark computation overhead affects overall costs. The conclusion is that considering PC1+PC2+C1+C2 and storage costs (i.e. not considering maintenance costs), a 128 bits of security NI-PoRep sector is 5% more expensive overall than a Interactive PoRep sector when sector duration is 3y. See full analysis [here](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0059.md).

## Backwards Compatibility

NI-PoRep would become a new proof type with a different on-chain flow as current PoRep (due to the removal of the `PreCommit` step).

## Test Cases

Run the code for NI-PoRep and check if the resulting proof cryptographically verifies (ie, run the verification software). Test cases will be included with implementation to be presented.

## Security Considerations

**Fiat-Shamir Heuristic and its effects**

> NI-PoRep is based on the well-known Fiat-Shamir Heuristic, which allows for having a non interactive protocol starting from any 3-message interactive protocol. However, the heuristic requires the interactive protocol to have at least 80 [bits of security](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Security_level) (instead of the current 10), and preferably 128. In order to have long term security we propose to opt for 128 bits: this means that for NI-PoRep we need  `NI_ChallengesNumber128bit` = 2268.

Reviewer 2: I believe it is better to keep the 128bit tag in the name as we may introduce lower or higher security levels in the future

> NI-PoRep is based on the well-known Fiat-Shamir Heuristic, which allows for having a non interactive protocol starting from any 3-message interactive protocol. However, the heuristic requires the interactive protocol to have at least 80 [bits of security](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Security_level) (instead of the current 10), and preferably 128. In order to have long term security we propose to opt for 128 bits: this means that for NI-PoRep we need  `NI_ChallengesNumber128bit` = 2268.

Reviewer: I get that,  but, as it stands, the FIP is not specifying any value for `NI_ChallengesNumber`. My understanding is that your goal was to use `2268`, but I may have misread it.

If you intend for this to be parametrizable and leave it up to the implementers what number to pick, then it's fine as is; `NI_ChallengesNumber128bit` is a recommendation but implementers can pick different security levels. If you intend for all clients to use `2268` (in the present), then the FIP needs to clearly assign that value to `NI_ChallengesNumber`.

> NI-PoRep is based on the well-known Fiat-Shamir Heuristic, which allows for having a non interactive protocol starting from any 3-message interactive protocol. However, the heuristic requires the interactive protocol to have at least 80 [bits of security](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Security_level) (instead of the current 10), and preferably 128. In order to have long term security we propose to opt for 128 bits: this means that for NI-PoRep we need  `NI_ChallengesNumber128bit` = 2268.

Reviewer 2: No, it is no a parameter chosen by the implementers. This FIP fixes it to 2268 (I'll clarify that in the FIP).
And the number it is dictated by the level of security we choose and fix (128 bits), that's why i think it is good to have it explicitly mentioned in the name. But `NI_ChallengesNumber` is also fine !

Our analysis shows that in terms of security there is no substantial difference with the case of Interactive PoRep and no additional security risks are introduced.

As a result of our analysis we propose to decouple power table lookback from consensus and set it to 7 days.
See discussion [#854](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/854) for full details.

## Incentive Considerations

NI-PoRep will implement the batch balancer currently in place. See [FIP-0013](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md) for details.

## Product Considerations

NI-PoRep represent the ultimate step forward after the introduction of Synthetic PoRep (see [FIP-0059](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0059.md)). 

As already mentioned above, NI-PoRep is a prerequisite to unblock new use cases like trustless SaaS and HDD wholesale as well as allowing for SupraSeal software employment at full potential. 

## Benchmarks

> In order to have a good cost estimation benchmarks on different systems were run. It’s consistent that the difference in the total runtime of the SNARK phase between interactive PoRep and non-interactive PoRep is the expected 12.5-13x.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to have a good cost estimation, we ran benchmarks on different systems. It’s consistent that the difference in the total runtime of the SNARK phase between interactive PoRep and non-interactive PoRep is the expected 12.5-13x.
```

> This phase consists of two distinct steps. The synthesis, which is a memory and CPU heavy operation and the proving, which is GPU heavy. The SupraSeal implementation only target the proving. There we see speedups between 6-10x. It depends on the GPU, while newer generations see higher speedups.
> 
> When the synthesis is also taken into account, then the overall improvements are 3-5x. There older GPU generations see higher speeds as the proving time dominates over the synthesis time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SNARK phase consists of two distinct steps:
- The synthesis, which is a memory- and CPU-heavy operation
- The proving, which is GPU-heavy. 

The SupraSeal implementation only targets the proving. There we see speedups between 6-10x. It depends on the GPU, while newer generations see higher speedups. When the synthesis is also taken into account, then the overall improvements are 3-5x. Older GPU generations see higher speeds as the proving time dominates over the synthesis time.
```

The text structure was very confusing; this suggestion should make it clearer. There are a few more issues in a separate comment.

Reviewer: Now, content:
* It's unclear to me what portion of this section refers to SupraSeal and what portion is general. Is SupraSeal the only thing we're benchmarking?
* The beginning of the section reads that "the difference in the total runtime of the SNARK phase ... is the expected 12.5-13x. Then we discuss the substeps of the same SNARK phase and say that "when the synthesis is _also_ taken into account, then the **overall** improvements are 3-5x". So what's the improvement after all?
* Why do "older GPU generations see higher speeds as the proving time dominates over the synthesis time"? This seems inconsistent _and_ poorly explained, since you're saying that 
  * "The SupraSeal implementation only targets the **proving** .. **newer** generations see higher speedups"
  * "**Older** GPU generations see higher speeds as the **proving** time dominates"
  * Inconsistency aside, I guess what you're trying to say is that the process is GPU-bound and newer GPUs could cope even with the previous "slow" one, whereas older GPUs were saturated and therefore become less of a bottleneck. That sort of makes sense, but then shouldn't it always be the case that older GPUs benefit more?

Author: @vmx can you step in here please?

Reviewer 3: > * It's unclear to me what portion of this section refers to SupraSeal and what portion is general. Is SupraSeal the only thing we're benchmarking?

The 12.5x-13x is interactive vs. non-interactive PoRep, the rest is all about SupraSeal.

> * The beginning of the section reads that "the difference in the total runtime of the SNARK phase ... is the expected 12.5-13x. Then we discuss the substeps of the same SNARK phase and say that "when the synthesis is _also_ taken into account, then the **overall** improvements are 3-5x". So what's the improvement after all?

SupraSeal makes Ni-PoRep 3-5x faster, while Ni-PoRep is 12.5-13x slower than interactive PoRep => Ni-PoRep with SupraSeal is 2.5-4.5x slower than interactive PoRep without SupraSeal.

> Why do "older GPU generations see higher speeds as the proving time dominates over the synthesis time"? This seems inconsistent _and_ poorly explained, since you're saying that
> 
>   * "The SupraSeal implementation only targets the **proving** .. **newer** generations see higher speedups"
> 
>   * "**Older** GPU generations see higher speeds as the **proving** time dominates"
> 
>   * Inconsistency aside, I guess what you're trying to say is that the process is GPU-bound and newer GPUs could cope even with the previous "slow" one, whereas older GPUs were saturated and therefore become less of a bottleneck. That sort of makes sense, but then shouldn't it always be the case that older GPUs benefit more?

The points were are trying to make is:

 - on newer GPUs, SupraSeal is faster (i.e. the proving time is proportionally lower)
 - taking the overall timing (including the synthesis) and you use an old GPU, you see a proportionally higher speedup. 

To use a concrete example (the numbers are made up and are jsut for illustration purpose):

On older GPUs the proving time is bigger than the synthesis time, so let's say synth time is 30s, proving time is 60s. The proving time speedup with SupraSeal is 6x, so the total time is 40s. So the speedup was 90s -> 40s.

On newer GPUs, the proving time is lower than the synthesis, so let's say synth time is 30s, proving time is 20s. The proving speedup with SupraSeal is 10x, so the total time is 32s. So the speedup was from 50s -> 32s.

This means that the overall speedup on older GPUs is higher, while the proving speedup on the newer GPU was higher..

Reviewer: Thanks for the clear explanation, @vmx ! I tried to distil it into the suggestion [below](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/891/files#r1473597943), which I think is much clearer without going into full detail.

---

> fip: "0059"

Reviewer 4: shouldn't this be to be assigned?

Reviewer 2: fix committed

title: NI-Porep

> author: "@Luca @Kubuxu @Nicola @nemo @vmx"

Reviewer 4: I don't think these are the right GitHub handles for folks. let's use names without `@` or tag `@` with the right GitHub handle plz. Useful to get it right incase any readers of the FIP would like to contact the author.

Author: ack

Reviewer 2: fix committed

discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/854 
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core

> created: 18 dec 2023

Reviewer 4: should be formatted in <date created on, in ISO 8601 (yyyy-mm-dd) format>, according to the template

Author: ack

---
# NI-PoRep 

## Simple Summary

> This proposal presents a new PoRep protocol (Non Interactive PoRep) that removes `PreCommit`. As a result, we have

Reviewer 4: rather than "removes PreCommit" - would  _makes `PreCommit` optional_ be more accurate?

Author: I don t think having it optional is correct. IF we talk specifically of NI PoRep, precommit messag is removed.

Reviewer 4: Ah yes I agreee - how about “where PreCommit is not needed”

Reviewer 4: But now you explained it it does read reasonable to me too. Will see what other editors thinks, otherwise we can just resolve the conversation and leave it as it is!

> - Flexible Onboarding Pipeline, unblocking SupraSeal full potential

Reviewer 4: ### 
```suggestion
- Flexible onboarding pipeline, unblocking SupraSeal's full potential
```

can you please link SupraSeal for reference - its not a part of any spec or FIP thus its not a common context that most readers of the FIPs have?

- Trustless separation between storage and computing: the proving tasks associated with sector onboarding can be outsourced.

## Abstract

> NI-PoRep allows to remove on-chain interaction when onboarding sectors by changing the way PoRep challenges are generated.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Non-Interactive PoRep (NI-PoRep) allows to remove on-chain interaction when onboarding sectors by changing the way PoRep challenges are generated.
```

A nit, but this acronym should be defined before being used.

Reviewer 2: fixed

> We allow SP to locally generate PoRep challenges instead of using on-chain randomness.

Reviewer 4: rather than `We` -> use _the chain_ or `the protocol`

Author: ack

On one hand, this feature of the protocol allows for drastically simpler onboarding pipeline. On the other hand, higher security guarantees than today are needed in order to preserve network security.

> We consider 128 bits of security as a robust level of security long term. It is possible to lower down security guarantees, but if we want a long term solution, 128 bits of security is the way to go.

Reviewer 4: what does 128 bits of security mean?

(in general I think this section belongs to Specification / Security Consideration.

Reviewer 5: Agreed, I don't think we should introduce trade-offs in the introduction.  We should clearly state the details of what's being proposed, including a high-level overview of how the change will be achieved.

Author: this is standard cryptographic security concept. we can expand if needed, no problem

Reviewer 4: Or can just have a quick hyper link. (I think my question is more raised from the fact currently it’s in the abstract - which should give a good  summary to folks have little context to be able to have an overview and understanding of  the proposal too.

Reviewer 2: I simplified the abstract: now it just describes the protocol changes without discussing trade-offs

In practice, this translates in an higher number of PoRep challenges (2268 per SDR layer instead of the current 180 per SDR layer) compared with today (12.6x).

## Motivation

There are multiple venues where NI-PoRep would be beneficial for Filecoin. 

> **Cost Reduction: removing complexity reduces costs and enables the full potential of SupraSeal improvements**

Reviewer 4: Could we breakdown the costs reduction to gas cost & hardware cost, and elaborate on the potential cost reduction of each?

Nudge on the gas cost reduction should supported with gas benchmarks/projections. It is possible one single message has a  total gas cost compare to 2 separate messages.

Author: We have a cost reduction section and doc linked in the discussion. I think we should decide if we want all the info related to NI-PoRep in the FIP or if we are ok with having all of these infos available for interested readers (aka in the discussion). My fear is that if the FIP is too long/too complicated to read in first place, not everybody is really able to navigate it/ppl get lost. Happy to change my mind if you see it differently.

Reviewer 4: My general take is, can the readers find the info they need in the FIP so they have a good understanding what NI PoRep is and what’s it for? 
if I just come to this fip, it’s currently not clear to me where can I save cost, nor do I know there is an answer in the fip discussion and where exactly in the discussion to find it. 

Either we can make the doc an appendix in this fip, or we should _at least_ have a link to the post you captured info. I prefer the former, curious what other @filecoin-project/fips-editors thinks

Reviewer 2: I added a sentence that summarise the gas cost saving and added the link to the public web page on the cryptonet website with all the details of the analysis. I believe this is a good compromise!

> - No `PreCommit` method and message, only `ProveCommit` will stay (only one method and one message needed to add sectors to the network);

Reviewer 4: This reads to me as we will remove PreCommit for all. 

id suggest to change 

> (only one method and one message needed to add sectors to the network

-> something like: only one step with one chain message needed to onboard sectors the the network when using NI PoRep, avoiding the need to precomit sectors.

Author: ack

Reviewer 2: fixed

- No `PCD` (PreCommit Deposit)

> - No waiting time between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`

Reviewer 4: In general these points speaks "reduce onboarding complexity & operational overhead" to me rather than "cost reduction".

Author: Got the feedback. 
What we wanted ti highlight was the "final outcome" of  "reduce onboarding complexity & operational overhead" , which is indeed cost reduction. 
A preliminary version of this FIP draft was mentioning onboarding complexity/operational overhead but then it seemed to be more effective to put those things under the umbrella of cost reduciton. We can rethink this aspect if we realize this is better

> - High impact in terms of SupraSeal software utilization

Reviewer 4: please elaborate more on the impact that will be realized and how come.

> **Trustless SaaS Enabled**

Reviewer 4: Please mentioned the full term of SaaS at least once. Linking to at least one reference with more details could be a bonus.

Reviewer 4: I.e Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS)

> - SaaS would be possible in a trustless manner (low risk-low trust: sealer does not need to put down collateral that will need to be re-paid by buyers or buyer does not need to pre-pay this amount)

Reviewer 4: could you please define terms like `SaaS providers`, `Sealer`, `Buyer`? those terms were not previously well established in any other filecoin spec/doc/FIP and may cause confusion for readers.

Author: You mean we should add a section about Sealing as a Service?

Reviewer 4: Tbh I don’t necessarily think this fip is the right place for that, I’m just worried these words might mean nothing or different thing to people who reads this Fip with different context.  - I wish we have a terminology /glossary page that we can just link to as a reference to SaaS  concepts

Reviewer 2: I just changed the phrasing there, hopefully it is more understandable and self contained now

- SaaS providers can delegate proving tasks. In particular, proving can be split into specialized subtasks which get outsourced to specialized entities (labeling the graph, Snarks, …)

> - Enabling HDD wholesale: it would be possible to receive brand new drives with Sector-Keys pre-generated in your name

Reviewer 4: What's "your name"? i.e: under a miner ID or what does it mean

Author: I don't understand you comment/question, sorry :)

> **PoRep secured Cryptographically and not Rationally**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**PoRep Secured Cryptographically and not Rationally**
```

Chain cryptographic security gets increased: NI-PoRep would make misbehaving cryptographically infeasible rather than irrational.

> **PoRep Security now independent from Consensus**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**PoRep Security Now Independent from Consensus**
```

> Current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness form the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, 150 epochs are needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This is due to the fact that some Consensus attacks need to be infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness from the chain. 
```

> Current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness form the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, 150 epochs are needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This is due to the fact that some Consensus attacks need to be infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness from the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, 150 epochs are needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This is due to the fact that some Consensus attacks need to be infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).
```

> In NI-PoRep, since randomness is derived locally, there is no link anymore between PoRep and consensus attacks. This mean that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In NI-PoRep, since randomness is derived locally, there is no link anymore between PoRep and consensus attacks. This means that
```

- Consensus attacks are not a concern anymore for PoRep security
- PoRep can now work “agnostically” with any consensus protocol

> **Backward compatibility**

Reviewer 4: there is a backward compatibility section where these are better fitted

Author: I don't think this si the case. Here we are highlighting benefits of NI PoRep wrt the status quo and the two bullets are indeed benefits rather than compatibility considerations

- NI-PoRep would be a separate proof type with a different on-chain flow as current PoRep. Anyone can decide whether use NI-PoRep or not.
- No need for a new trusted setup

## Specification

NI-PoRep protocol can be summarized as follows:

> **Graph Labelling and commitments** (similar to the current `PC1` and `PC2` computation)

Reviewer 4: is `graph labelling` a specific term-  not sure if the _l_ in labeling needs to be capitalized

1. Using `ReplicaID` (which contains `CommD`), SP computes the labels for all layers and the replica R;
2. SP compute the column commitments `CommC` , `CommRLast` and finally computes `CommR = Poseidon_2(CommC, CommRLast)`;

> **Storage Provider locally generates** `NI_ChallengesNumber` **challenges and vanilla proofs;**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Storage Provider locally generates `NI_ChallengesNumber` challenges and vanilla proofs;**
```

I don't think the double wrapping would work

1. Each challenge is of the form `ch_i = H(tag, ReplicaID, commR, i)`;
2. SP computes responses for all the `NI_ChallengesNumber` challenges, which result in `NI_ChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs;

**Storage Provider publishes the new `NI_ProveCommitSector` proof**

1. SP takes the `NI_ChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs and computes the corresponding SNARK proofs for these challenges.
2. SP publishes the snark and commitment `CommR` (either in individual or aggregated form).
    1. Note in this step the SP will, by default, use the SnarkPack aggregation technique to prove even only one sector (see “product considerations” section for the motivation).

**Chain verifies proof**

1. Using `CommR` as a seed, the chain generates `NI_ChallengesNumber` challenges and these are fed into proof verification

### Actor changes

- Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when submitting a new sector
    - `RegisteredSealProof_NIStackedDrg32GiBV1`
    - `RegisteredSealProof_NIStackedDrg64GiBV1`

> - Introduce a new method `ProveSector`, combining the functionalities of `PreCommitSector` and `ProveCommitSector` taking the following parameters (assuming the implementation of FIP-0076):

Reviewer 4: TODO: include method nummber

if we can batch sectors, `ProveSectors` might be a better name.

Reviewer 4: if made anything assumption that dependent on FIP-0076, please highlight the FIP-0076 dependency in the FIP header metadata section.

    
    ```go
    struct ProveSectorParams {
    		// carries information which previously was passed in PreCommit

>     		sector_infos: []SectorPreCommitInfo

Reviewer 4: bad formatting - SectorInfos maybe?

### Proof changes

- Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when pre-committing a new sector
    - `RegisteredSealProof::FeatureNIStackedDrgWindow32GiBV1_2`
    - `RegisteredSealProof::FeatureNIStackedDrgWindow64GiBV1_2`
- Related constants
    - `NI_porep_min_challenges` set to 2253; That’s the theoretical minimum number for 128 bits of security, for practical reasons the number of challenges will be 2268.
- New challenge generation function:
    
    ```rust
    // That's the sector size in bytes divided by the node size (32 bytes).
    const SECTOR_NODES: u32
    const NUM_CHALLENGES = 2268
    // The `tag` is a domain separation tag, which is just a list of bytes.
    fn gen_porep_challenges(tag: [u8], ReplicaID: [u8; 32], CommR: [u8; 32]):
    for i in 0..NUM_CHALLENGES {
        digest: [u8; 32] = sha256(tag || le_bytes(ReplicaID) || le_bytes(CommR) || le_bytes(i))
        bigint = u256::from_le_u32s(digest)
        challenge: u32 = (bigint % (SECTOR_NODES - 1)) + 1
    }
    ```
    

> NI-PoRep is an *optional* feature that can be opt-in for those interested. The previously available proofs types can be used to continue the PoRep behavior.

Reviewer 4: worth mentioning this is an optional feature in an earlier section too, i.e: abstract/simple summary

Reviewer 2: added to the abstract

> ## Rationale

Reviewer 4: content in this section seems to be completely duplicated with the motivation section, what are you hoping to call out here?

Reviewer 2: modified

> NI-PoRep represents the ultimate PoRep optimization which has little downside with respect to the status quo. It would allow to remove `PreCommit` (and thus PreCommit Deposit), at the cost of augmenting C2 costs (which would result in a limited cost increase looking at onboarding costs as a whole. More details in [Discussion #854](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/854)). Additionally, we would have

Reviewer 4: include the cost analysis in FIP text rather than referring to a discussion, where information are scattered.

Author: That choice was made to have an "as lightweight as possible" FIP, but we can incorporate stuff from the discussion if this seems a better choice

- Drastically simplified pipeline
- Decoupling of Storage and Computation (thus trustless SaaS and HDD wholesale)
- No need of new Trusted Setup,
- No proving overhead on the StorageProvider side,
- No impact on PoRep security

We considered lower level of security (like 80 bits) but we are convinced that 128 is the best long term option.

[gas and proving considerations to be added after fil crypto review]

[batch balancer paragraph to be added]

## Backwards Compatibility

> Synthetic PoRep would become a new proof type with a different on-chain flow as current PoRep (due to the removal of the `PreCommit` step).

Reviewer 4: Synthetic porep ??

Author: Synthetic PoRep is an optimization of the current interactive one. NI-PoRep is a different approach which represent a step forward to the interactive approach as a whole. I don't think we should replace Synthetic. I'd say everyone should pick what fits best his own needs. It can be that the NI-PoRep snark overhead does not fit a specific SP setup while Synthetic does. It can also be someone want to stick with the current interactive PoRep. 
In general if we want to replace something with something else, I think it makes more sense to replace current interactive proof with Synthetic, rather than replacing synthetic with Ni-PoRep

Reviewer 2: is this resolved @jennijuju ?

## Test Cases

> Will be included with implementation to be presented.

Reviewer 4: Test cases should be proposed for implementers to include

Reviewer 2: @jennijuju who should I ask help to get the test  cases?

Reviewer 4: I think @cryptonemo / @magik6k can help!

On one hand, `SealRandomness` needs to be taken from finalized blocks, but on the other hand it can not be taken farther back than necessary (in order to protect against long-range attacks). This means that `SealRandomness` needs to be verified.

Given NI-PoRep removes onchain interaction, `SealRandomness` verification becomes more difficult, but still necessary to protect the chain against the same class of attacks mentioned above.

We set up a validity time window which holds for all the sectors committed onchain together. We set this time window to be  `sealChallengeEarliest` = 30 days, which is coherent with the current `MaxProveCommitDuration` as per FIP-0013.

This means that, if PC1, PC2, C1, C2 happen locally over time resulting into different sectors sealed in different moments in time and committed on-chain at the end of the process, all sectors committed together should have a randomness which is not older than  `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs in the past. As a result, a NI-PoRep step needs to be completed within `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs overall to be valid.

> ## Addressing concerns **due to interaction removal**

Author: Hey @jsoares, thanks for the point raised. Tbh i don t see a major issue with the current writeup. 
The flow is the following:

- Some ppl legitimately raised the point that an adversary could add sectors all at once without being noticed.
- we run some analysis and noticed that something really similar can happen with the current interactive porep, when considering unbounded adversaries (both computation and collateral)
- in theory those adversary are covered by consensus security, thus no major concern
- to be on the safe side, we propose to decouple the lookback from finality and set it to a longer value than today, so both NI and interactive porep "attempt of attack" have detection period which is long enough.

Details are in the discussion, linked below. 

If we want the details in the FIP, that's fine, but if we include all the details of all the analysis that we did, then fip is becoming really long, technical, and (at least imho) less accessible to a non technical reader.

Reviewer: Thanks for the explanation. Let me see if I can suggest a phrasing that makes sense. However, if there's no material change to the status quo, the proposal is out of place here -- the conclusion should just be that an analysis was performed and there is no change. The proposal can follow in a separate FIP. The analysis, to the extent that it is relevant, also shouldn't be linked to Notion as that's neither permanent nor immutable, and should be brought into the FIP or, in order to keep it manageable, under /resources/.

One point to take into account when dealing with NI-PoRep, compared with the status quo, is that a malicious party willing to take over the network could potentially keep accumulating sectors locally onboarding them to the network all in a sudden.

Our analysis shows that in terms of security there is no substantial difference with the case of Interactive PoRep and no additional security risks are introduced.

> As a result of our analysis we propose to decouple power table lookback from consensus and set it to 7 days.

Reviewer 4: Can this FIP move forward without the linked mitigation?

Author: I think we should move forward anyway. The longer lookback is something which is common to both current proof and NU-PoRep proof. 
That said, we should also progress on proporsing a FIP for a larget PT lookback. Discussion is out, we discover some constraints which make having a 7 days large PT lookback not immediate (aka requiring a few weeks of @Kubuxu 's work to make it possible), but we should definitely progress in parallel. I'd not stop NI-PoRep.

Reviewer 2: modified!

As already mentioned above, NI-PoRep is a prerequisite to unblock new use cases like trustless SaaS and HDD wholesale as well as allowing for SupraSeal software employment at full potential. 

## Benchmarks

In order to have a good cost estimation benchmarks on different systems were run. It’s consistent that the difference in the total runtime of the SNARK phase between interactive PoRep and non-interactive PoRep is the expected 12.5-13x.

This phase consists of two distinct steps. The synthesis, which is a memory and CPU heavy operation and the proving, which is GPU heavy. The SupraSeal implementation only target the proving. There we see speedups between 6-10x. It depends on the GPU, while newer generations see higher speedups.

When the synthesis is also taken into account, then the overall improvements are 3-5x. There older GPU generations see higher speeds as the proving time dominates over the synthesis time.

For exemplary results of the benchmarks see: [SupraSeal C2 benchmarks](https://www.notion.so/SupraSeal-C2-benchmarks-9739face18a9448e8b6de1a1fcc9c0e3?pvs=21).

## Implementations

Implementation in progress.

> 

Reviewer 4: Include a #TODO section or mark inline todos with _TODO: xxxxxxxxx_

> ---
> fip: XXXX
> title: NI-Porep
> author: luca (@lucaniz), kuba (@Kubuxu), nicola (@nicola), nemo (@cryptonemo), volker (@vmx), irene (@irenegia)
> discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/854 
> status: Draft
> type: Technical
> category: Core
> created: 2023-12-18
> ---
> # NI-PoRep 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
fip: "XXXX"
title: Non-Interactive PoRep
author: luca (@lucaniz), kuba (@Kubuxu), nicola (@nicola), nemo (@cryptonemo), volker (@vmx), irene (@irenegia)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/854 
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2023-12-18
---
# FIP-XXXX: Non-Interactive PoRep
```

Probably best to use the expanded version in the title.

## Simple Summary

> This proposal presents a new PoRep protocol (Non-Interactive PoRep) that removes `PreCommit` when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors. As a result, we have

Reviewer: Consider replacing _remove_ with _skip_ throughout the text. Even though this is stated explicitly several times, it makes it clearer that this is an alternate path and `PreCommit` will still exist for other paths.

Reviewer 2: I see your point here, but I do not like skip very much because it sounds like the PreCommit step is there but we omit it. And this is wrong, for the new protocol there is no PreCommit step at all.

Reviewer: I realise that too but it was the best alternative that came to mind. Maybe _forgo_ would avoid both issues? 🤷 

This is not a big deal. If you'd rather keep remove, that's okay.

- Simplified onboarding pipeline, unblocking [SupraSeal](https://github.com/supranational/supra_seal)'s full potential
- Trustless separation between storage and computing: the proving tasks associated with sector onboarding can be outsourced.

## Abstract

> Non-Interactive PoRep (NI-PoRep) allows to remove on-chain interaction when onboarding  Committed Capacity (CC) sectors by changing the way PoRep challenges are generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-Interactive PoRep (NI-PoRep) allows the removal of on-chain interaction when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors by changing the way PoRep challenges are generated.
```

The protocol allows SP to locally generate PoRep challenges instead of using on-chain randomness.

> On one hand, this feature of the protocol allows for drastically simpler onboarding pipeline. On the other hand, it requires an higher number of PoRep challenges (2268 per SDR layer instead of the current 180 per SDR layer) in order to preserve network security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the one hand, this feature of the protocol allows for a drastically simpler onboarding pipeline. On the other hand, it requires a higher number of PoRep challenges (2268 per SDR layer instead of the current 180 per SDR layer) in order to preserve network security.
```

> NI-PoRep is proposed as an *optional* feature, the previously available proofs types will be still supported. NI-PoRep is restricted to CC sectors (i.e., sectors with no data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NI-PoRep is proposed as an *optional* feature; the previously available proof types will still be supported. NI-PoRep is restricted to CC sectors (i.e., sectors with no data).
```

## Motivation

NI-PoRep will be beneficial for Filecoin in multiple ways, outlined below.

### Cost reduction thanks to a simplified onboarding pipeline

> PoRep is currently interactive (in order to complete sealing, an SP has to wait to receive a challenge seed from the chain) and requires ad-hoc collateral. These features represent a limitation when considering optimisation for the onboarding pipeline, such as Sealing-as-a-Service and the new SupraSeal sealing code. With NI-PoRep we have no interaction is needed and this yields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PoRep is currently interactive (in order to complete sealing, an SP has to wait to receive a challenge seed from the chain) and requires ad-hoc collateral. These features represent a limitation when considering optimisation for the onboarding pipeline, such as Sealing-as-a-Service and the new SupraSeal sealing code. With NI-PoRep, no interaction is needed and this yields:
```

- [Gas cost reduction] Current PoRep is composed of two steps: PreCommit and ProveCommit. With NI-PoRep there is no more `PreCommit` method and message, and only `ProveCommit` remains, i.e. only one step with one chain message is needed to onboard sectors to the network.  This translates into a possible gas cost reduction when considering aggregated sectors; according to [our estimation](../resources/fip-xxx-niporep/PoRep_GasComparison.pdf), current PoRep is 2.1x more expensive than NI-PoRep when aggregating 6 sectors.
- [Lower hardware requirements] With NI-PoRep, there is no more waiting time between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This helps when using sealing software (like SupraSeal) that seals more sectors at the same time. Currently, memory requirements are increased by the fact that some data need to be stored during the waiting time. Having no waiting time implies lower memory requirements. 

### Trustless Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS) becomes possible

NI-PoRep enables the full separation between computation and storage tasks. In particular, no `PCD` (PreCommit Deposit) is needed, which brings the following benefits:

> - Currently a SaaS Provider (the entity running the PoRep steps) needs to put down the PCD for the sector. The PCD will be re-paid or is prepaid by the SP sending the final SNARK proof on chain (i.e., the SP which will store the sector for the following spacetime proofs). With this NI-PoRep this level of interaction is not needed. In particular, this kind of simplification helps SaaS providers to delegate computation tasks (ie, PoRep can be split into specialized subtasks that get outsourced to specialized entities).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Currently a SaaS Provider (the entity running the PoRep steps) needs to put down the PCD for the sector. The PCD will be re-paid or prepaid by the SP sending the final SNARK proof on chain (i.e., the SP that will store the sector for the following PoST). With this NI-PoRep this level of interaction is not needed. In particular, this kind of simplification helps SaaS providers to delegate computation tasks (ie, PoRep can be split into specialized subtasks that get outsourced to specialized entities).
```

> - Enabling HDD wholesale: for an SP it would be possible to receive brand new drives with sectorKeys pre-generated using its miner_id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enabling HDD wholesale: for an SP it would be possible to receive brand new drives with `sectorKeys ` pre-generated using its `miner_id`.
```

### PoRep secured cryptographically and not rationally

Chain cryptographic security gets increased: NI-PoRep would make misbehaving cryptographically infeasible rather than irrational.

### PoRep security now independent from consensus

> Current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness from the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, 150 epochs are needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This is due to the fact that some consensus attacks need to be infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness from the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, 150 epochs are needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This is due to the fact that some consensus attacks need to be made infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).
```

- PoRep can now work “agnostically” with any consensus protocol.

## Backward compatibility

- NI-PoRep would be a separate proof type with a different on-chain flow as current PoRep. Anyone can decide whether to use NI-PoRep or not.
- No need for a new trusted setup.

## Specification

The NI-PoRep protocol can be summarized as follows:

**Graph labelling and commitments** (similar to the current PC1 and PC2 computation)

1. Using `ReplicaID`, SP computes the labels for all layers and the replica R;
2. SP computes the column commitments `CommC` , `CommRLast` and finally computes `CommR = Poseidon_2(CommC, CommRLast)`;

**SP locally generates `NIChallengesNumber` challenges and vanilla proofs;**

1. Each challenge is of the form `NIChallenge_i = H(ReplicaID, CommR, i)`;
2. SP computes responses for all the `NIChallengesNumber` challenges, which result in `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs;

**SP publishes the new `NIProveCommitSector` proof**

1. SP takes the `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs and computes the corresponding SNARK proofs for these challenges.
2. SP publishes the SNARK proofs and commitment `CommR` (either in individual or aggregated form).

>     * Note that, in this step, the SP will, by default, use the SnarkPack aggregation technique, even if only proving one sector. Indeed, the large amount of proofs due to the higher number of challenges (see Design Rationale section) makes aggregation by default viable.

Reviewer: @vmx noted below that this text is misleading. Leaving a comment to mark it.

Reviewer 3: My reply is at https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/891/files/7cc034b096fb091f304effe2b2ff30fe25e9a089#r1499709694

> 1. SP takes the `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs and computes the corresponding SNARK proofs for these challenges.
> 2. SP publishes the SNARK proofs and commitment `CommR` (either in individual or aggregated form).
>     * Note that, in this step, the SP will, by default, use the SnarkPack aggregation technique, even if only proving one sector. Indeed, the large amount of proofs due to the higher number of challenges (see Design Rationale section) makes aggregation by default viable.

Reviewer 3: Here's the updated version. Shorter, simpler and hopefully less confusing:

```suggestion
1. SP takes the `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs and computes the corresponding SNARK proofs for these challenges and aggregates them into a single proof.
2. SP publishes the aggregated SNARK proof and commitment `CommR`.
```

  struct SectorNIActivationInfo {
      SectorNumber: SectorNumber,
      SealedCID: Cid, // CommR
      SealRandEpoch: ChainEpoch,
      Expiration: ChainEpoch,
  }

  struct ProveCommitSectorsNIParams {
     // Information about sealing of each sector.
     Sectors: []SectorNIActivationInfo
     // Proof type for each seal (must be an NI-PoRep variant)
     SealProofType: RegisteredSealProof,
     // Proofs for each sector, parallel to activation manifests.
     // Exactly one of sector_proofs or aggregate_proof must be non-empty.
     SectorProofs: [][]byte,
     // Aggregate proof for all sectors.
     // Exactly one of sector_proofs or aggregate_proof must be non-empty.
     AggregateProof: []byte,
     // Proof type for aggregation, if aggregated
     AggregateProofType: Option<RegisteredAggregateProof>
     // Whether to abort if any sector activation fails.
     RequireActivationSuccess: bool,
   }
  ```

### Proof changes

- Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when pre-committing a new sector
    - `RegisteredSealProof::FeatureNIStackedDrgWindow32GiBV1_2`
    - `RegisteredSealProof::FeatureNIStackedDrgWindow64GiBV1_2`
- Related constants

>     - `NI_porep_min_challenges` set to 2253. That’s the theoretical minimum number for 128 bits of security, for practical reasons the number of challenges will be 2268.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `NI_porep_min_challenges` set to 2253, the theoretical minimum number for 128 bits of security. For practical reasons, the number of challenges will be 2268.
```

The new onboarding method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` is restricted to CC-sectors. We decided for this design for the following reasons:
1. We believe that the main users of NI-PoRep will be SaaS Providers, which will use NI-PoRep for CC sectors anyway. In the SaaS scenario, the flow where the SP ships the data over to an SaaS Provider and then gets back the sealed data (replica) seems more complex (and therefore more expensive in practice) than the flow where the SaaS Provider distributes CC sectors and then the SP can snap the data later. This should be especially true after [FIP0082](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0082.md) (SuperSnap) will be deployed in the network.

> 2. We think that restricting the new onboarding method to CC sectors can simplify the storage pipeline for Filecoin. Currently, there are quite few different flows for onboarding data; having such diversity (ie, complexity) can be a source of risk and can slow down protocol development. If NI-PoRep (restricted to C sectors) will be widely adopted, we may be allowed to consider the "CC+Snap" flow as the standard for Filecoin and deprecate older onboarding methods. Note that beyond simplified pipeline, the "CC+Snap" flow allows for the possibility of new features. For a sector that is onboarded as CC, we have the `SectorKey` proved on chain this means we can support re-snap (sector data to be replaced more than once) and proof-of-access to unsealed copy protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. We think that restricting the new onboarding method to CC sectors can simplify the storage pipeline for Filecoin. Currently, there are quite a few different flows for onboarding data; having such diversity (ie, complexity) can be a source of risk and can slow down protocol development. If NI-PoRep (restricted to CC sectors) is widely adopted, we may come to consider the "CC+Snap" flow as the standard and deprecate older onboarding methods. Note that beyond a simplified pipeline, the "CC+Snap" flow allows for the possibility of new features. For a sector that is onboarded as CC, we have the `SectorKey` proved on-chain, meaning we can support re-snap (sector data to be replaced more than once) and proof-of-access to unsealed copy protocols.
```

> 4. Last but not least: Implementation of the NI-PoRep onboarding method could be much simpler if it only supports CC sectors. Data sectors add significant code complexity in the miner actor to support two different ways of committing to data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Implementation of the NI-PoRep onboarding method is simplified by only supporting CC sectors. Data sectors add significant code complexity in the miner actor to support two different ways of committing to data.
```

## Backwards Compatibility

> NI-PoRep would become a new proof type with a different on-chain flow as current PoRep (due to the removal of the `PreCommit` step).

Reviewer: I think you're trying to say this is strictly additive, but the section is nevertheless incomplete, as it should explain what changes and what doesn't, and why an upgrade is required.

Reviewer 2: @jsoares 
Maybe it is short, but I think it is complete saying that we get a new flow (explained in details in the spec section) - this is what changes- and everything else stays the same.
We used the same short format for Synthetic PoRep FIP and it worked well.

Reviewer 4: I will add a new ProveCommitSectorNI method is added and the exiting ProveCommitSectors method will not accept NI Porep proof  - is this correct? if so this should be in the spect too imho

This proposal presents a new PoRep protocol (Non-Interactive PoRep) that removes `PreCommit` when onboarding CC sectors. As a result, we have

- Simplified onboarding pipeline, unblocking [SupraSeal](https://github.com/supranational/supra_seal)'s full potential
- Trustless separation between storage and computing: the proving tasks associated with sector onboarding can be outsourced.

## Abstract

Non-Interactive PoRep (NI-PoRep) allows to remove on-chain interaction when onboarding CC sectors by changing the way PoRep challenges are generated.

The protocol allows SP to locally generate PoRep challenges instead of using on-chain randomness.

On one hand, this feature of the protocol allows for drastically simpler onboarding pipeline. On the other hand, it requires an higher number of PoRep challenges (2268 per SDR layer instead of the current 180 per SDR layer) in order to preserve network security.

NI-PoRep is proposed as an *optional* feature, the previously available proofs types will be still supported. NI-PoRep is restricted to CC sectors (i.e., sectors with no deals).

## Motivation

NI-PoRep will be beneficial for Filecoin in multiple ways, outlined below.

> **Cost reduction thanks to a simplified onboarding pipeline**

Reviewer 6: Use Markdown headers

```suggestion
### Cost reduction thanks to a simplified onboarding pipeline
```

Chain cryptographic security gets increased: NI-PoRep would make misbehaving cryptographically infeasible rather than irrational.

**PoRep security now independent from consensus**

Current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness from the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, 150 epochs are needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This is due to the fact that some consensus attacks need to be infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).
In NI-PoRep, since randomness is derived locally, there is no link anymore between PoRep and consensus attacks. This means that

- Consensus attacks are not a concern anymore for NI-PoRep security;
- PoRep can now work “agnostically” with any consensus protocol.

**Backward compatibility**

- NI-PoRep would be a separate proof type with a different on-chain flow as current PoRep. Anyone can decide whether to use NI-PoRep or not.
- No need for a new trusted setup.

## Specification

The NI-PoRep protocol can be summarized as follows:

**Graph labelling and commitments** (similar to the current PC1 and PC2 computation)

1. Using `ReplicaID`, SP computes the labels for all layers and the replica R;

> 2. SP computes the column commitments `CommC` , `CommRLast` and finally computes `CommR = Poseidon_2(CommC, CommRLast)`;

Reviewer 6: Can you link or refer to an existing specification of PoRep that defines all these terms and the basic algorithm being modified here?

Reviewer 3: Algorithm: https://spec.filecoin.io/algorithms/sdr/
Notation: https://spec.filecoin.io/algorithms/sdr/notation/

Reviewer 2: @anorth Some of the terms (like, commRLast) are in the spec https://spec.filecoin.io/#section-algorithms.pos.porep, but not all of them (like I think PC1 etc are not defined there).

The technical report [here](https://www.overleaf.com/read/dhrksghwpqys#a8ce4b) should have all names and algorithms, but the link (i mean the location) not stable enough for future reference I guess...

    - `RegisteredSealProof_NIStackedDrg32GiBV1`
    - `RegisteredSealProof_NIStackedDrg64GiBV1`
- Introduce a new method `ProveCommitSectorsNI`, which performs a non-interactive proof for CC sectors, without the need for a preceding PreCommitSector. Note that there is no piece or deal information; sectors are constrained to commit to “zero” data.
  ```go
  // Note no UnsealedCID because it must be "zero" data.
  struct SectorNIActivationInfo {
      SectorNumber: SectorNumber,
      SealedCID: Cid, // CommR
      SealRandEpoch: ChainEpoch,
      Expiration: ChainEpoch,
  }

  struct ProveCommitSectorsNIParams {
     // Information about sealing of each sector.
     Sectors: []SectorNIActivationInfo
     // Proof type for each seal (must be an NI-PoRep variant)
     SealProofType: RegisteredSealProof,
     // Proofs for each sector, parallel to activation manifests.
     // Exactly one of sector_proofs or aggregate_proof must be non-empty.
     SectorProofs: [][]byte,
     // Aggregate proof for all sectors.
     // Exactly one of sector_proofs or aggregate_proof must be non-empty.
     AggregateProof: []byte,
     // Proof type for aggregation, if aggregated

>      AggregateProofType: Option<RegisteredAggregateProof>

Reviewer 6: Text above says that SnarkPack will be used for aggregation even for single sectors. Does that mean that this AggregateProofType is required always, not only if aggregating across sectors?

Reviewer 3: > Text above says that SnarkPack will be used for aggregation even for single sectors.

The text above is misleading (I'll check with the team and will propose a change). It's unrelated to the aggregation mentioned here for the actor.

> I think that AggregateProofType should be required only when aggregating among sectors and not for proofs for a single sector.

Yes, the `AggregateProofType` is only required when multiple Ni-PoRep proofs are aggregated.

Reviewer 2: solved!

     // Whether to abort if any sector activation fails.
     RequireActivationSuccess: bool,
   }

>   ```

Reviewer 6: We need to define the return type from this new method too.

Reviewer 2: I believe the return type is the same as the one for the ProveCommitAggregate method. Correct?
cc @Kubuxu

### Proof changes

- Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when pre-committing a new sector
    - `RegisteredSealProof::FeatureNIStackedDrgWindow32GiBV1_2`
    - `RegisteredSealProof::FeatureNIStackedDrgWindow64GiBV1_2`
- Related constants
    - `NI_porep_min_challenges` set to 2253. That’s the theoretical minimum number for 128 bits of security, for practical reasons the number of challenges will be 2268.
- New challenge generation function:
    
    ```rust
    // That's the sector size in bytes divided by the node size (32 bytes).
    const SECTOR_NODES: u32
    const NUM_CHALLENGES = 2268
    // The `tag` is a domain separation tag, which is just a list of bytes.
    fn gen_porep_challenges(tag: [u8], ReplicaID: [u8; 32], CommR: [u8; 32]):
    for i in 0..NUM_CHALLENGES {
        digest: [u8; 32] = sha256(tag || le_bytes(ReplicaID) || le_bytes(CommR) || le_bytes(i))
        bigint = u256::from_le_u32s(digest)
        challenge: u32 = (bigint % (SECTOR_NODES - 1)) + 1
    }
    ```  

> NI-PoRep is an *optional* feature that can be opt-in for those interested. The previously available proofs types can be used to continue the PoRep behavior.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
NI-PoRep is an *optional* feature that can be opt-in for those interested. The previously available proofs types can be used with existing onboarding methods to continue interactive PoRep behavior.
```

4. Last but not least: Implementation of the NI-PoRep onboarding method could be much simpler if it only supports CC sectors. Data sectors add significant code complexity in the miner actor to support two different ways of committing to data.

## Backwards Compatibility

NI-PoRep would become a new proof type with a different on-chain flow as current PoRep (due to the removal of the `PreCommit` step).

## Test Cases

Run the code for NI-PoRep and check if the resulting proof cryptographically verifies (ie, run the verification software). Test cases will be included with implementation to be presented.

## Security Considerations

> **Fiat-Shamir Heuristic and its effects**

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### Fiat-Shamir Heuristic and its effects
```
Here and below too

**How to take `SealRandomness` for ensuring sectors are anchored to the chain**

The epoch in which sealing took place is identified by the corresponding chain reference, called `SealRandomness` which is the anchor of the sector to the chain. `SealRandomness` must be taken from the VRF chain, in order to ensure that no other fork can replay the Seal.

On one hand, `SealRandomness` needs to be taken from finalized blocks, but on the other hand it can not be taken farther back than necessary (in order to protect against long-range attacks). This means that `SealRandomness` needs to be verified.

Given NI-PoRep removes onchain interaction, `SealRandomness` verification becomes more difficult, but still necessary to protect the chain against the same class of attacks mentioned above.

We set up a validity time window which holds for all the sectors committed onchain together. We call this time window to be  `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs and set its value to be the number of epochs in 30 days, which is coherent with the current `MaxProveCommitDuration` as per FIP-0013.

> This means that, if PC1, PC2, C1, C2 happen locally over time resulting into different sectors sealed in different moments in time and committed on-chain at the end of the process, all sectors committed together should have a randomness which is not older than  `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs in the past. As a result, a NI-PoRep step needs to be completed within `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs overall to be valid.

Reviewer 6: The seal randomness window needs to be part of the specification, though some of the rationale for the specific value can stay here.

## Addressing concerns **due to interaction removal**

Concerns were raised over the possibility that a malicious party wanting to take over the network could potentially keep accumulating sectors locally before onboarding them to the network all at once. [Our analysis](../resources/fip-xxx-niporep/interactionRemoval.pdf.pdf) shows that no additional security risks are introduced with respect to Interactive PoRep. The security of both pathways can be improved by decoupling the power table lookback from consensus, which may be a subject for a future FIP.

## Incentive Considerations

> NI-PoRep will implement the batch balancer currently in place. See [FIP-0013](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md) for details.

Reviewer 6: This needs to be part of the spec

Reviewer 2: @anorth is it be enough to move this sentence from here to the spec section?

Reviewer 2: marked as todo for now (i am working to figure out if we need new params or not)

2. SP computes responses for all the `NIChallengesNumber` challenges, which result in `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs;

**SP publishes the new `NIProveCommitSector` proof**

1. SP takes the `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs and computes the corresponding SNARK proofs for these challenges and aggregates them into a single proof.
2. SP publishes the aggregated SNARK proof and commitment `CommR`.

**Chain verifies proof**

1. Using `CommR` as a seed, the chain generates `NIChallengesNumber` challenges and these are fed into proof verification.

Note that, same as with interactive PoRep, each sector has a `SealRandEpoch` that identifies the sealing epoch; chain verification needs to happen within a fixed number of epochs to be valid. For NI-PoRep we call this parameter `sealChallengeEarliest`and set it to be equal to the number of epochs in 30 days (more details in the [Security Considerations section](#security-considerations)).

### Actor changes

- Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when submitting a new sector
    - `RegisteredSealProof_NIStackedDrg32GiBV1`
    - `RegisteredSealProof_NIStackedDrg64GiBV1`

> - Introduce a new method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` (method 36), which performs a non-interactive proof for CC sectors, without the need for a preceding PreCommitSector. Note that there is no piece or deal information; sectors are constrained to commit to “zero” data. We can use the same return type as `ProveCommitAggregate`.

Reviewer 4: Peer: for my understanding, is ProveCommitAggregate supposed to be able to take aggregated NIPoRepProof too?

Reviewer 2: yes, `ProveCommitSectorsNI` work both for seal proofs or aggregate proof

  struct SectorNIActivationInfo {
      SectorNumber: SectorNumber,
      SealedCID: Cid, // CommR
      SealRandEpoch: ChainEpoch,
      Expiration: ChainEpoch,
  }

  struct ProveCommitSectorsNIParams {
     // Information about sealing of each sector.
     Sectors: []SectorNIActivationInfo
     // Proof type for each seal (must be an NI-PoRep variant)
     SealProofType: RegisteredSealProof,
     // Proofs for each sector, parallel to activation manifests.
     // Exactly one of sector_proofs or aggregate_proof must be non-empty.
     SectorProofs: [][]byte,
     // Aggregate proof for all sectors.
     // Exactly one of sector_proofs or aggregate_proof must be non-empty.
     AggregateProof: []byte,
     // Proof type for aggregation, if aggregated
     AggregateProofType: Option<RegisteredAggregateProof>
     // Whether to abort if any sector activation fails.
     RequireActivationSuccess: bool,
   }
  ```
- Related constants
    - `sealChallengeEarliest` set to be equal to the number of epochs in 30 days.
      
### Proof changes

- Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when pre-committing a new sector

>     - `RegisteredSealProof::FeatureNIStackedDrgWindow32GiBV1_2`

Reviewer 4: Peer: i think these are seal proof not PoST proof, no?
Shouldn't these to be 
 `StackedDrg32GiBV1_2_Feat_NIPoRep` & `StackedDrg64GiBV1_2_Feat_NIPoRep`

-  do we need new Window proof too?
- we will need 2k/512mib (8mib -> more optional) proof too for testing

Reviewer 2: no, we don't need new window proof type. There is a typo in the names (I'll remove `window` there)

> we will need 2k/512mib (8mib -> more optional) proof too for testing

yes, but we did not add the type for testing in the spec before (iirc) so I think we can skip it here too

Reviewer 2: @vmx could you please confirm that we should remove `window` from `RegisteredSealProof::FeatureNIStackedDrgWindow32GiBV1_2`

what is the correct name here? thanks

Reviewer 3: Based on SynthPoRep, which is named `StackedDrg32GiBV1_1_Feat_SyntheticPoRep` I suggest:

    RegisteredSealProof::StackedDrg32GiBV1_1_Feat_NiPoRep

@cryptonemo can you please confirm that name (with a thumbs up or so).

Reviewer 7: I think it's more correct to be `StackedDrg32GiBV1_2_Feat_NiPoRep`, but we could similarly map it to V1_1 if needed

Reviewer 2: thanks, edited in the fip

    - `RegisteredSealProof::FeatureNIStackedDrgWindow64GiBV1_2`
- Related constants

>     - `NI_porep_min_challenges` set to 2253, the theoretical minimum number for 128 bits of security. For practical reasons, the number of challenges will be 2268.

Reviewer 4: is NI_porep_min_challenges the number of challenges or something else? not clear to me whether it should be 2253 or 2268

>     - `NI_porep_min_challenges` set to 2253, the theoretical minimum number for 128 bits of security. For practical reasons, the number of challenges will be 2268.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - The theoretical minimum number for 128 bits of security and at least 2253 challenges. For practical reasons, 2268 challenges are the possible minimum amount, and the `ni_porep_min_challenges` should be set to 2268.
```

clarifying based on a  discussion with irene

- New challenge generation function:
    
    ```rust
    // That's the sector size in bytes divided by the node size (32 bytes).
    const SECTOR_NODES: u32
    const NUM_CHALLENGES = 2268
    // The `tag` is a domain separation tag, which is just a list of bytes.
    fn gen_porep_challenges(tag: [u8], ReplicaID: [u8; 32], CommR: [u8; 32]):
    for i in 0..NUM_CHALLENGES {
        digest: [u8; 32] = sha256(tag || le_bytes(ReplicaID) || le_bytes(CommR) || le_bytes(i))
        bigint = u256::from_le_u32s(digest)
        challenge: u32 = (bigint % (SECTOR_NODES - 1)) + 1
    }
    ```  

NI-PoRep is an *optional* feature that can be opt-in for those interested. The previously available proofs types can be used with existing onboarding methods to continue interactive PoRep behavior.

> TODO: specify batch balancer params.

Reviewer 4: q to discuss (move to discussion)- is it necessary to batch balancer for this onboarding flow

## Design Rationale

Current PoRep is interactive, and it is composed of two steps: PreCommit and ProveCommit. At PreCommit, SP puts down a collateral (PCD) and waits 150 epochs in order to receive a challenge seed from the chain, which enables the ProveCommit step. 
A first step to mitigate the downsides of the waiting time was the introduction of Synthetic PoRep (See [FIP-0059](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0059.md)), which reduces the size of the temporary data stored between PreCommit and ProveCommit. 
NI-PoRep is a further step forward, completely foregoing on-chain interaction (ie, the waiting time) and the need of PCD by allowing SP to locally generate challenges instead of using on-chain randomness. 

> NI-PoRep has little downside with respect to the status quo: it removes PreCommit at the cost of augmenting C2 (ie SNARK generation) costs, which would result in a limited cost increase looking at onboarding costs as a whole). Indeed, NI-PoRep requires 12.8x more PoRep Challenges, which translates into an 12.8x SNARK proving overhead. We analyzed how this SNARK computation overhead affects overall costs. The conclusion is that considering PC1+PC2+C1+C2 and storage costs (i.e. not considering maintenance costs), a NI-PoRep sector with 128 bits of security is 5% more expensive than an Interactive PoRep sector when sector duration is 3y. See full analysis [here](../resources/fip-xxx-niporep/NIPoRep_CostAnalysis.pdf).

Reviewer 4: Why is the worst-case scenario for security modeled using sector duration 1.5 yr - which is the minimal sector duration atm?

Reviewer 2: Actually, we are not analysing security here, but the cost overhead due to the new security params (ie, 12.8 x challenges).

But you are right that the cost difference between NI-PoRep and Interactive PoRep is maximum when sector duration is minimum. 
I think it make sense con consider 3y as that is the most common duration we see in the network.

Reviewer 4: is there a reason why you think 3yr can be considered as the most common duration we see in the network?

Most SP set sector duration according to deal durations and not majority of the data clients are making 3yr deals (data from early Feb)
<img width="587" alt="image" src="https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/assets/42981373/25b2ee20-7109-4d73-af08-dc2008882a76">

Reviewer 2: what's on the x axis here? 
are you saying majority of deals have 25000 epochs (~9 days)? It sounds not correct to me @jennijuju

The new onboarding method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` is restricted to CC-sectors. We decided for this design for the following reasons:

> 1. We believe that the main users of NI-PoRep will be SaaS Providers, which will use NI-PoRep for CC sectors anyway. In the SaaS scenario, the flow where the SP ships the data over to an SaaS Provider and then gets back the sealed data (replica) seems more complex (and therefore more expensive in practice) than the flow where the SaaS Provider distributes CC sectors and then the SP can snap the data later. This should be especially true after [FIP0082](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0082.md) (SuperSnap) will be deployed in the network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. We believe that the main users of NI-PoRep will be SaaS Providers, which will use NI-PoRep for CC sectors anyway. In the SaaS scenario, the flow where the SP ships the data over to an SaaS Provider and then gets back the sealed data (replica) seems more complex (and therefore more expensive in practice) than the flow where the SaaS Provider distributes CC sectors and then the SP can snap the data later. This should be especially true if [FIP0082](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0082.md) (SuperSnap) is deployed in the network.
```

> 1. We believe that the main users of NI-PoRep will be SaaS Providers, which will use NI-PoRep for CC sectors anyway. In the SaaS scenario, the flow where the SP ships the data over to an SaaS Provider and then gets back the sealed data (replica) seems more complex (and therefore more expensive in practice) than the flow where the SaaS Provider distributes CC sectors and then the SP can snap the data later. This should be especially true after [FIP0082](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0082.md) (SuperSnap) will be deployed in the network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. We believe that the main users of NI-PoRep will be SaaS Providers, which will use NI-PoRep for CC sectors anyway. In the SaaS scenario, the flow where (1) the SP ships the data over to an SaaS Provider and then gets back the sealed data (replica) seems more complex (and therefore more expensive in practice) than the flow where the SaaS Provider distributes CC sectors and then the SP can snap the data later; (2) Data client can technically transfer the data directly to SaaS, however, requiring clients needs to find both trustworthy SaaS and SP adds on undesired overhead. This should be especially true after [FIP0082](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0082.md) (SuperSnap) will be deployed in the network.
```

Reviewer 4: an add-on based on my understanding - feel free to accept / modify / or reject

Reviewer 2: is "data client" a common term?
I don't want to lead to confusion using it

Reviewer 4: I think so?

> 2. We think that restricting the new onboarding method to CC sectors can simplify the storage pipeline for Filecoin. Currently, there are quite a few different flows for onboarding data; having such diversity (ie, complexity) can be a source of risk and can slow down protocol development. If NI-PoRep (restricted to CC sectors) is widely adopted, we may come to consider the "CC+Snap" flow as the standard and deprecate older onboarding methods. Note that beyond a simplified pipeline, the "CC+Snap" flow allows for the possibility of new features. For a sector that is onboarded as CC, we have the `SectorKey` proved on-chain, meaning we can support re-snap (sector data to be replaced more than once) and proof-of-access to unsealed copy protocols.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. We think that restricting the new onboarding method to CC sectors can simplify the storage pipeline for Filecoin. Currently, there are quite a few different flows for onboarding data; having such diversity (ie, complexity) can be a source of risk and can slow down protocol development. It also complicates the SP stack software and new SP onboarding. If NI-PoRep (restricted to CC sectors) is widely adopted, we may come to consider the "CC+Snap" flow as the standard and deprecate older onboarding methods. Note that beyond a simplified pipeline, the "CC+Snap" flow allows for the possibility of new features. For a sector that is onboarded as CC, we have the `SectorKey` proved on-chain, meaning we can support re-snap (sector data to be replaced more than once) and proof-of-access to unsealed copy protocols.
```

> 3. Implementation of the NI-PoRep onboarding method is simplified by only supporting CC sectors. Data sectors add significant code complexity in the miner actor to support two different ways of committing to data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

I think this is already covered in point 2

Reviewer 2: Not really. Point two is about storage pipeline in general, point 3 focuses on the implementation (like, how many line of codes, state updates needed etc)

---

> fip: "XXXX"

Reviewer 4: FIP-0090

title: Non-Interactive PoRep
author: luca (@lucaniz), kuba (@Kubuxu), nicola (@nicola), nemo (@cryptonemo), volker (@vmx), irene (@irenegia)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/854 
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2023-12-18
---
# FIP-XXXX: Non-Interactive PoRep

## Simple Summary

This proposal presents a new PoRep protocol (Non-Interactive PoRep) that removes `PreCommit` when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors. As a result, we have

> - Simplified onboarding pipeline, unblocking [SupraSeal](https://github.com/supranational/supra_seal)'s full potential
> - Trustless separation between storage and computing: the proving tasks associated with sector onboarding can be outsourced.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Simplified storage onboarding pipeline
- Trustless separation between storage and computing: the proving tasks associated with sector onboarding can be outsourced. 
- Unblocking [SupraSeal](https://github.com/supranational/supra_seal)'s full potential
```

## Abstract

Non-Interactive PoRep (NI-PoRep) allows the removal of on-chain interaction when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors by changing the way PoRep challenges are generated.

> The protocol allows SP to locally generate PoRep challenges instead of using on-chain randomness.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The protocol allows Storage Providers (SPs) to locally generate PoRep challenges instead of using on-chain randomness.
```

> On the one hand, this feature of the protocol allows for a drastically simpler onboarding pipeline. On the other hand, it requires a higher number of PoRep challenges (2268 per SDR layer instead of the current 180 per SDR layer) in order to preserve network security.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This feature of the protocol allows for a drastically simpler onboarding pipeline. On the other hand, it requires a higher number of PoRep challenges (2268 per SDR layer instead of the current 180 per SDR layer) in order to preserve network security.
```

NI-PoRep is proposed as an *optional* feature; the previously available proof types will still be supported. NI-PoRep is restricted to CC sectors (i.e., sectors with no data).

> 
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

## Motivation

NI-PoRep will be beneficial for Filecoin in multiple ways, outlined below.

### Cost reduction thanks to a simplified onboarding pipeline

> PoRep is currently interactive (in order to complete sealing, an SP has to wait to receive a challenge seed from the chain) and requires ad-hoc collateral. These features represent a limitation when considering optimisation for the onboarding pipeline, such as Sealing-as-a-Service and the new SupraSeal sealing code. With NI-PoRep, no interaction is needed and this yields:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
PoRep is currently interactive (in order to complete sealing, an SP has to wait to receive a challenge seed from the chain) and requires ad-hoc collateral. These features represent a limitation when considering optimisation for the onboarding pipeline, such as Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS) and the new SupraSeal sealing code. With NI-PoRep, no interaction is needed and this yields:
```

- [Gas cost reduction] Current PoRep is composed of two steps: PreCommit and ProveCommit. With NI-PoRep there is no more `PreCommit` method and message, and only `ProveCommit` remains, i.e. only one step with one chain message is needed to onboard sectors to the network.  This translates into a possible gas cost reduction when considering aggregated sectors; according to [our estimation](../resources/fip-xxx-niporep/PoRep_GasComparison.pdf), current PoRep is 2.1x more expensive than NI-PoRep when aggregating 6 sectors.
- [Lower hardware requirements] With NI-PoRep, there is no more waiting time between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This helps when using sealing software (like SupraSeal) that seals more sectors at the same time. Currently, memory requirements are increased by the fact that some data need to be stored during the waiting time. Having no waiting time implies lower memory requirements. 

> 

Reviewer 4: should we add sealing efficiency as well - i.e: faster sealing rate with wait seed removed (150 epochs)

Reviewer 2: wait seed is removed but snark generation is a bit slower (is this correct @vmx ?), overall the rate is higher but i do not have the exact number, so I would prefer not mentioning it before we have benchmarks

Reviewer 3: I'd say it depends on your hardware. If generating 12.8 times the SNARKs takes less time than 150 epochs, then you have a faster sealing rate.

### Trustless Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS) becomes possible

> NI-PoRep enables the full separation between computation and storage tasks. In particular, no `PCD` (PreCommit Deposit) is needed, which brings the following benefits:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NI-PoRep enables the full separation between computation and storage tasks. In particular, no `PCD` ([PreCommit Deposit](https://spec.filecoin.io/#section-systems.filecoin_mining.storage_mining.balance-requirements)) is needed, which brings the following benefits:
```

> - Currently a SaaS Provider (the entity running the PoRep steps) needs to put down the PCD for the sector. The PCD will be re-paid or prepaid by the SP sending the final SNARK proof on chain (i.e., the SP that will store the sector for the following PoST). With this NI-PoRep this level of interaction is not needed. In particular, this kind of simplification helps SaaS providers to delegate computation tasks (ie, PoRep can be split into specialized subtasks that get outsourced to specialized entities).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Currently a SaaS Provider (the entity running the PoRep steps) needs to put down the PCD for the sector, along with the PreCommit message. The PCD will be re-paid or prepaid by the SP sending the final SNARK proof on the chain (i.e., the SP that will store the sector for the following PoST). With NI-PoRep, this level of payment interaction is not needed. In particular, this kind of simplification helps SaaS providers to delegate computation tasks (ie, PoRep can be split into specialized subtasks that get outsourced to specialized entities).
```

Reviewer 4: > this kind of simplification helps SaaS providers to delegate computation tasks

Do you mean SaaS providers OR SPs to delegate here, or both?

Reviewer 2: SaaS providers

- Enabling HDD wholesale: for an SP it would be possible to receive brand new drives with `sectorKeys ` pre-generated using its `miner_id`.

### PoRep secured cryptographically and not rationally

> The cryptographic security of sectors proven with NI-PoRep is increased: NI-PoRep makes misbehaving cryptographically infeasible rather than irrational.

Reviewer 4: Do you have any data to prove this statement? (if so maybe include in the security section?)

### PoRep security now independent from consensus

> Current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness from the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, 150 epochs are needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This is due to the fact that some consensus attacks need to be made infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness from the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, a 150-epochs-wait is needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This is due to the fact that some consensus attacks need to be made infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).
```
